


Sieve Working Group                                        A. Stone, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                               Hydric Acid
Updates: 3028 (if approved)
Intended status: Standards Track                            May 26, 2008
Expires: November 27, 2008


      Sieve Email Filtering: Reject and Extended Reject Extensions
                   draft-ietf-sieve-refuse-reject-07

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 27, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   This memo updates the definition of the Sieve mail filtering language
   "reject" extension, originally defined in RFC 3028.

   A "Joe-job" is a spam run forged to appear as though it came from an
   innocent party, who is then generally flooded by automated bounces,
   Message Disposition Notifications (MDNs), and personal messages with
   complaints.  The original Sieve "reject" action defined in RFC 3028



Stone, et al.           Expires November 27, 2008               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Sieve Extension: Reject                May 2008


   required use of MDNs for rejecting messages, thus contributing to the
   flood of Joe-job spam to victims of Joe-jobs.

   This memo updates the definition of the "reject" action to allow
   messages to be refused during the SMTP transaction, and defines the
   "ereject" action to require messages to be refused during the SMTP
   transaction, if possible.

   The "ereject" action is intended to replace the "reject" action
   wherever possible.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Conventions Used in This Document  . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Sieve 'reject' and 'ereject' Extentions  . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1.  Action ereject . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
       2.1.1.  Rejecting a message at the SMTP/LMTP protocol level  .  4
       2.1.2.  Rejecting a message by sending a DSN . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Action reject  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       2.2.1.  Rejecting a message by sending an MDN  . . . . . . . .  6
     2.3.  Silent upgrade from reject to ereject  . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.4.  Compatibility with other actions . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.5.  Details of protocol level refusal  . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.  Changes from RFC 3028  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.1.  reject extension registration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.2.  ereject extension registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 14















Stone, et al.           Expires November 27, 2008               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Sieve Extension: Reject                May 2008


1.  Introduction

   The Sieve mail filtering language [SIEVEBIS], as originally defined
   in RFC 3028 [SIEVE], specified that the "reject" action shall discard
   a message and send a Message Disposition Notification [MDN] to the
   envelope sender along with an explanatory message.  RFC 5228
   [SIEVEBIS] does not define any reject action, hence the purpose of
   this document.

   This document updates the definition of the "reject" action to permit
   refusal of the message during the SMTP transaction, if possible, and
   defines a new "ereject" action to require refusal of the message
   during the SMTP transaction, if possible.

   Implementations are further encouraged to use spam-detection systems
   to determine the level of risk associated with sending an MDN, and
   this document allows implementations to silently drop the MDN if the
   rejected message is deemed to be likely spam.

   Further discussion highlighting the risks of generating MDNs and the
   benefits of protocol-level refusal can be found in [Joe-DoS].

1.1.  Conventions Used in This Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [KEYWORDS].

   Conventions for notations are as in RFC 3028 [SIEVE] Section 1.1.

   This document does not attempt to define spam or how it should be
   identified, nor to define an email virus or how it should be
   detected.  Implementors are advised to follow best practices and keep
   abreast of current research in these fields.


2.  Sieve 'reject' and 'ereject' Extentions

2.1.  Action ereject

   Usage: ereject <reason: string>

   Sieve implementations that implement the "ereject" action must use
   the "ereject" capability string.

   The "ereject" action cancels the implicit keep and refuses delivery
   of a message.  The reason string is a UTF-8 [UTF-8] string specifying
   the reason for refusal.  How a message is refused depends on the



Stone, et al.           Expires November 27, 2008               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Sieve Extension: Reject                May 2008


   capabilities of the mail component (MDA or MTA) executing the Sieve
   script.  The Sieve interpreter MUST carry out one of the following
   actions (listed in order from most to least preferred), SHOULD carry
   out the most preferable action, and SHOULD fall back to lesser
   actions if a preferred action fails.

   1.  Refuse message delivery by sending a 5XX response code over SMTP
       [SMTP] or LMTP [LMTP].  See Section 2.1.1 for more details.

   2.  Discard the message if a return-path verification clearly
       indicates that the message has a forged return-path.

   3.  Send a non-delivery report to the envelope sender ([REPORT]
       [DSN]).  See Section 2.1.2 for more details.

   The ereject action MUST NOT be available in environments that do not
   support protocol level rejection, e.g. an MUA, and MUST be available
   in all other environments that support the reject action.

       Example:
               require ["ereject"];

               if address "from" "someone@example.com" {
                   ereject "I no longer accept mail from this address";
               }

2.1.1.  Rejecting a message at the SMTP/LMTP protocol level

   Sieve implementations that are able to reject messages at the SMTP/
   LMTP level MUST do so and SHOULD use the 550 response code.  Note
   that if a message is arriving over SMTP and has multiple recipients,
   some of whom have accepted the message, Section 2.1.2 defines how to
   reject such a message.

   Note that SMTP [SMTP] does not allow non-ASCII characters in the SMTP
   response text.  If non-ASCII characters appear in the "reason"
   string, they can be sent at the protocol level if and only if the
   client and the server use an SMTP extension that allows for
   transmission of non-ASCII reply text.  (One example of such an SMTP
   extension is described in [UTF8-RESP].)  In the absence of such an
   SMTP extension, the Sieve engine MUST replace any reason string being
   sent at the protocol level and containing non-ASCII characters with
   an implementation-defined ASCII-only string.

   Users who don't like this behavior should consider using the "reject"
   action described in Section 2.2, if available.

   See Section 2.5 for the detailed instructions about performing



Stone, et al.           Expires November 27, 2008               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Sieve Extension: Reject                May 2008


   protocol level rejection.

2.1.2.  Rejecting a message by sending a DSN

   An implementation may receive a message via SMTP that has more than
   one RCPT TO that has been accepted by the server, and at least one
   but not all of them are refusing delivery (whether the refusal is
   caused by a Sieve "ereject" action or for some other reason).  In
   this case, the server MUST accept the message and generate DSNs for
   all recipients that are refusing it.  Note that this exception does
   not apply to LMTP, as LMTP is able to reject messages on a per-
   recipient basis.  (However, the LMTP client may then have no choice
   but to generate a DSN to report the error, which may result in
   blowback.)

   Note that according to [DSN], Delivery Status Notifications MUST NOT
   be generated if the MAIL FROM (or Return-Path) is empty.

   The DSN message MUST follow the requirements of [DSN] and [REPORT]
   The action-value field defined in [DSN], Section 2.3.3, MUST contain
   the value "failed".  The human-readable portion of the non-delivery
   report MUST contain the reason string from the "ereject" action and
   SHOULD contain additional text alerting the apparent original sender
   that the message was refused by an email filter.  This part of the
   report might appear as follows:

   ------------------------------------------------------------
   Your message was refused by the recipient's mail filtering program.
   The reason given was as follows:

   I am not taking mail from you, and I don't want your birdseed,
   either!
   ------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.  Action reject

   This section updates the definition of the reject action in Section
   4.1 of RFC 3028 and is an optional extension to [SIEVEBIS].

          Usage:   reject <reason: string>

   Sieve implementations that implement the "reject" action must use the
   "reject" capability string.

   The "reject" action cancels the implicit keep and refuses delivery of
   a message.  The reason string is a UTF-8 [UTF-8] string specifying
   the reason for refusal.  Unlike the "ereject" action described above,
   this action would always favor preserving the exact text of the



Stone, et al.           Expires November 27, 2008               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Sieve Extension: Reject                May 2008


   refusal reason.  Typically the "reject" action refuses delivery of a
   message by sending back an MDN to the alleged sender (see
   Section 2.2.1).  However implementations MAY refuse delivery over
   protocol (as detailed in Section 2.5), if and only if all of the
   following conditions are true:

   1.  The reason string consists of only US-ASCII characters
         or
       The reason string contains non-US-ASCII and both client and
       server support and negotiate use of an SMTP/LMTP extension for
       sending UTF-8 responses.

   2.  LMTP protocol is used
         or
       SMTP protocol is used and the message has a single recipient
         or
       SMTP protocol is used, the message has multiple recipients, and
       all of them refused message delivery (whether using Sieve or
       not).


       Example:
               require ["reject"];

               if size :over 100K {
                   reject text:
       Your message is to big. If you want to send me a big attachment,
       put it on a public web site and send me an URL.
       .
                   ;
               }

   (Pretend that the reason string above contains some non-ASCII text.)

2.2.1.  Rejecting a message by sending an MDN

   The reject action resends the received message to the envelope sender
   specified by the MAIL FROM (or Return-Path) address, wrapping it in a
   "reject" form, explaining that it was rejected by the recipient.

   Note that according to [MDN], Message Disposition Notifications MUST
   NOT be generated if the MAIL FROM (or Return-Path) is empty.

   A reject message MUST take the form of a failure MDN as specified by
   [MDN].  The human-readable portion of the message, the first
   component of the MDN, contains the human readable message describing
   the error, and it SHOULD contain additional text alerting the
   apparent original sender that mail was refused by an email filter.



Stone, et al.           Expires November 27, 2008               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Sieve Extension: Reject                May 2008


   The MDN disposition-field as defined in the MDN specification MUST be
   "deleted" and MUST have the "MDN-sent-automatically" and "automatic-
   action" modes set (see Section 3.2.6 of [MDN]).

   In the following script, a message is rejected and returned to the
   alleged sender.

       Example:
               require ["reject"];

               if header :contains "from" "coyote@desert.example.org" {
                   reject text:
       I am not taking mail from you, and I don't
       want your birdseed, either!"
       .
                   ;
               }

   For this script, the first part of the MDN might appear as follows:

   ------------------------------------------------------------
   The message was refused by the recipient's mail filtering program.
   The reason given was as follows:

   I am not taking mail from you, and I don't want your birdseed,
   either!
   ------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.  Silent upgrade from reject to ereject

   Implementations MUST NOT silently upgrade reject actions to ereject
   actions, however user interfaces may change the specific action
   underlying a descriptive representation, thereby effecting a silent
   upgrade of sorts.

   Script generators SHOULD ensure that a rejection action being
   executed as a result of an anti-spam/anti-virus positive test be done
   using the ereject action, as it is more suitable for such rejections.

   Script generators MAY automatically upgrade scripts that previously
   used the reject action for anti-spam/anti-virus related rejections.
   Note that such generators MUST make sure that the target environment
   can support the ereject action.

2.4.  Compatibility with other actions

   This section applies equally to "reject" and "ereject" actions.  All
   references to the "reject" action in this section can be replaced



Stone, et al.           Expires November 27, 2008               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Sieve Extension: Reject                May 2008


   with the "ereject" action.

   A "reject" action cancels the implicit keep.

   Implementations MUST prohibit the execution of more than one reject
   in a Sieve script.

   "Reject" MUST be incompatible with the "vacation" [VACATION] action.
   It is NOT RECOMMENDED that implementations permit the use of "reject"
   with actions that cause mail delivery, such as "keep", "fileinto",
   "redirect".

   Making "reject" compatible with actions that cause mail delivery
   violates the RFC 2821 [SMTP] principle that a message is either
   delivered or bounced back to the sender.  So bouncing a message back
   (rejecting) and delivering it will make the sender believe that the
   message was not delivered.

   However, there are existing laws requiring certain organizations to
   archive all received messages, even the rejected ones.  Also, it can
   be quite useful to save copies of rejected messages for later
   analysis.

   Any action that would modify the message body will not have an effect
   on the body of any message refused by "reject" using an SMTP response
   code and MUST NOT have any effect on the content of generated DSN/
   MDNs.

2.5.  Details of protocol level refusal

   If the "reason" string consists of multiple CRLF separated lines,
   then the reason text MUST be returned as a multiline SMTP/LMTP
   response, per [SMTP], Section 4.2.1.  Any line MUST NOT exceed the
   SMTP limit on the maximal line length.  To make the reason string
   conform to any such limits the server MAY insert CRLFs and turn the
   response into a multiline response.

   In the following script (which assumes support for the spamtest
   [SPAMTEST] and fileinto extensions), messages that test highly
   positive for spam are refused.











Stone, et al.           Expires November 27, 2008               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Sieve Extension: Reject                May 2008


       Example:
               require ["ereject", "spamtest", "fileinto",
                        "comparator-i;ascii-numeric"];

               if spamtest :value "ge"
                           :comparator "i;ascii-numeric" "6" {
                   ereject text:
       AntiSpam engine thinks your message is spam.
       It is therefore being refused.
       Please call 1-900-PAY-US if you want to reach us.
       .
                   ;
               } elsif spamtest :value "ge"
                                :comparator "i;ascii-numeric" "4" {
                   fileinto "Suspect";
               }

   The following excerpt from an SMTP session shows it in action.

         ...
         C: DATA
         S: 354 Send message, ending in CRLF.CRLF.
          ...
         C: .
         S: 550-AntiSpam engine thinks your message is spam.
         S: 550-It is therefore being refused.
         S: 550 Please call 1-900-PAY-US if you want to reach us.

   If the SMTP/LMTP server supports RFC 2034 [ENHANCED-CODES] it MUST
   prepend an appropriate Enhanced Error Code to the "reason" text.
   Enhanced Error code 5.7.1 or a more generic 5.7.0 are RECOMMENDED.
   With an Enhanced Error Code, the response to DATA command in the SMTP
   example below will look like:

         S: 550-5.7.1 AntiSpam engine thinks your message is spam.
         S: 550-5.7.1 It is therefore being refused.
         S: 550 5.7.1 Please call 1-900-PAY-US if you want to reach us.

   if the server selected "5.7.1" as appropriate.

   If a Sieve implementation that supports "ereject" does not wish to
   immediately disclose the reason for rejection (for example, that it
   detected spam), it may delay immediately sending of the 550 error
   code by sending a 4XX error code on the first attempt to receive the
   message.






Stone, et al.           Expires November 27, 2008               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Sieve Extension: Reject                May 2008


3.  Changes from RFC 3028

   Clarified that the "reject" action cancels the implicit keep.
   Extended the list of allowable actions on "reject" to include
   protocol level message rejection.

   Added the "ereject" action that is similar to "reject", but will
   always favor protocol level message rejection.


4.  Security Considerations

   The Introduction to this document discusses why rejecting messages
   before delivery is better than accepting and bouncing them.

   Security issues associated with email auto-responders are fully
   discussed in the Security Considerations section of [RFC3834].  This
   document is not believed to introduce any additional security
   considerations in this general area.

   The "ereject" extension does not raise any other security
   considerations that are not already present in the base [SIEVE]
   specification, and these issues are discussed in [SIEVE].


5.  IANA Considerations

   The following section provides the IANA registrations for the Sieve
   extensions specified in this document:

5.1.  reject extension registration

   IANA is requested to update the registration for the Sieve "reject"
   extension as detailed below:

   Capability name: reject
   Description:     adds the "reject" action for refusing delivery
                    of a message.  The exact reason for refusal is
                    conveyed back to the client.
   RFC number:      this RFC
   Contact address: the Sieve discussion list <ietf-mta-filters@imc.org>

5.2.  ereject extension registration

   IANA is requested to replace the preliminary registration of the
   Sieve refuse extension with the following registration:





Stone, et al.           Expires November 27, 2008              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Sieve Extension: Reject                May 2008


   Capability name: ereject
   Description:     adds the 'ereject' action for refusing delivery
                    of a message. The refusal should happen as early
                    as possible (e.g. at the protocol level) and might
                    not preserve the exact reason for refusal if it
                    contains non-US-ASCII text.
   RFC number:      this RFC
   Contact address: the Sieve discussion list <ietf-mta-filters@imc.org>


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [DSN]      Moore, K. and G. Vaudreuil, "An Extensible Message Format
              for Delivery Status Notifications", RFC 3464,
              January 2003.

   [ENHANCED-CODES]
              Freed, N., "SMTP Service Extension for Returning Enhanced
              Error Codes", RFC 2034, October 1996.

   [KEYWORDS]
              Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [LMTP]     Myers, J., "Local Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 2033,
              October 1996.

   [MDN]      Hansen, T. and G. Vaudreuil, "Message Disposition
              Notification", RFC 3798, May 2004.

   [REPORT]   Vaudreuil, G., "The Multipart/Report Content Type for the
              Reporting of Mail System Administrative Messages",
              RFC 3462, January 2003.

   [SIEVE]    Showalter, T., "Sieve: A Mail Filtering Language",
              RFC 3028, January 2001.

   [SIEVEBIS]
              Guenther, P. and T. Showalter, "Sieve: An Email Filtering
              Language", RFC 5228, January 2008.

   [SMTP]     Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 2821,
              April 2001.

   [UTF-8]    Yergeau, F., "UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO
              10646", STD 63, RFC 3629, November 2003.



Stone, et al.           Expires November 27, 2008              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           Sieve Extension: Reject                May 2008


   [VACATION]
              Showalter, T. and N. Freed, "Sieve Email Filtering:
              Vacation Extension", RFC 5230, January 2008.

6.2.  Informative References

   [Joe-DoS]  "Mail Non-Delivery Message DDoS Attacks", 4 2004.

   [RFC3834]  Moore, K., "Recommendations for Automatic Responses to
              Electronic Mail", RFC 3834, August 2004.

   [SPAMTEST]
              Daboo, C., "Sieve Email Filtering: Spamtest and Virustest
              Extensions", RFC 5235, January 2008.

   [UTF8-RESP]
              Melnikov, A., "SMTP Language Extension",
              draft-melnikov-smtp-lang-07 (work in progress), June 2007.


Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Ned Freed, Cyrus Daboo, Arnt Gulbrandsen, Kristin Hubner,
   Mark E. Mallett, Philip Guenther, Michael Haardt, and Randy Gellens
   for comments and corrections.

   The authors gratefully acknowledge the extensive work of Tim
   Showalter as the author of the RFC 3028, which originally defined the
   "reject" action.


Authors' Addresses

   Aaron Stone (editor)
   Hydric Acid
   260 El Verano Ave
   Palo Alto, CA  94306
   USA

   Email: aaron@serendipity.palo-alto.ca.us











Stone, et al.           Expires November 27, 2008              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           Sieve Extension: Reject                May 2008


   Matthew Elvey
   The Elvey Partnership, LLC
   1819 Polk Street, Suite 133
   San Francisco, CA  94109
   USA

   Email: sieve3@matthew.elvey.com


   Alexey Melnikov
   Isode Limited
   5 Castle Business Village
   36 Station Road
   Hampton, Middlesex  TW12 2BX
   UK

   Email: Alexey.Melnikov@isode.com


































Stone, et al.           Expires November 27, 2008              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           Sieve Extension: Reject                May 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Stone, et al.           Expires November 27, 2008              [Page 14]

